JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Recently I was asked
to write an article about
the visual viewport API.
SURMA: Oh.
So I thought of the viewport
as basically the rectangle
off the top of your entire
document, the subsection
that you can see.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: Right?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly.
SURMA: OK, good.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And that was
kind of how things started on
mobile as well.
We had that, you know, the idea
of a whole document, and then
a viewport, which was the
bit you were looking at.
But what Apple decided is
to have this extra viewport.
So when you pinch
zoom in, you're
now in a viewport (WHISPERING)
inside the viewport.
Du-du-du.
SURMA: That's very Inception-y.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It is.
SURMA: Uh.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Wah.
[MUSICAL SOUND EFFECT]
Surma wins again.
SURMA: I think my
job is done here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So
here's the thing.
And this is how a lot
of browsers implemented
it at first is like
position fixed items
would sit on the
viewport, right?
If you positioned
something fixed to top,
it sits wherever you do
that on the viewport.
So you're scrolling
along, it stays fixed.
SURMA: So if you zoom in, it
would still stick to the top
instead of--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It gets bigger.
And, you know,
eventually you can't--
your positioned, fixed
items, if you have them--
SURMA: Just cover--
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Are now taking up--
right, the whole screen.
And this is something
that I think
Apple pioneered is the idea
of adding multiple viewports.
And the names we've given
them is the layout viewport
is the outer one.
And that's what's-- that's kind
of the outer scroll viewport
of the document.
That's where the position
fixed items will stick to.
And when you pinch
zoom in, you're
now in the visual viewport.
SURMA: OK.
So it doesn't mean, though,
that the layout viewport only
moves vertically?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: No, it can
move horizontally as well.
SURMA: Because it can still
have a layout that's wider
than your layout viewport.
So you can still
move both directions.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Absolutely.
Yeah.
SURMA: Yeah, OK.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: You can
think of the layout viewport
as being the same as the visual
viewport when you're zoomed out
as far as you can go.
One of the problems that a lot
of mobile browsers had is they
couldn't decide which viewport
the value should be for.
So one of these ones is
getBoundingClientRect.
Right?
SURMA: Yes, I see.
That would be a problem
because usually those
are the coordinates of the
rectangle of the object
that you're calling that
function on "on screen,"
but now "on screen," right?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Aha, right.
And most browsers agreed
that that was going
to be to the layout viewport.
So pinch zooming didn't matter.
SURMA: I would tend to agree.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
But then most browsers
also agreed that scroll top
would mean the visual viewport.
SURMA: Really?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
Yeah, exactly.
And this had--
SURMA: I would have seen
that the visual viewport's
like a complete
abstract [INAUDIBLE]..
Layout viewport implies layout.
And then the visual
viewport is just
basically a visual trimming
of whatever you laid out.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly.
And that's what browsers
are now trying to do.
SURMA: Yes.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: They're
trying to get to-- yes,
you've come up with
the correct answer.
Unfortunately, you're too late.
Other people already got
there and are implementing it.
And this is kind of an agreement
between Chrome and Apple,
and others are agreeing as well.
So one of the things you would
do with getBoundingClientRect
is you didn't want that
position within the viewport.
You wanted the position
within the document.
SURMA: I was just about
to say, and then you
need both scroll top and
getBoundingClientRect
to be layout viewport
because then you
can just add the two up--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: And find the position
within the document, which
is super important, which
I just recently ran into.
Because sometimes
you want an element
to detach from however it's laid
out and position it absolutely
but relative to the document.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
Because you want to do an
animation or something.
SURMA: Exactly.
And that's why you need to be
able to do that kind of math.
I guess if we had
chosen the other way,
it's all relative to
the visual viewport.
It would have
probably added some
calls to get to do the
calculations in there,
but that's unnecessarily
complicated.
So I'm really happy
they went that way.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But the
web is full of this code
now that is doing that
getBoundingClientRect
plus scroll top, which breaks
as soon as you pinch zoom in.
SURMA: Oh, yes.
True.
We would have broken the web.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah, exactly.
So this is going to-- this move
to making everything the layout
viewport is actually starting
to fix existing code, which
is really nice.
SURMA: Nice.
Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So the
idea is, like you say, make
the pinch zooming thing
pretty much entirely
transparent-- like
not something that is
reflected in any web APIs.
SURMA: Is it exposed in any way?
Can I figure out if
the user is zoomed in?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So that's what
the visual viewport API is for.
SURMA: Ha.
[LAUGHING]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
That is what the visual
viewport API is for.
And it is basically--
the idea is
that this is going to
be the only place where
that is exposed.
And it will tell you
the position and scale
of the visual viewport relative
to the layout viewport.
I think one of the
things it would be useful
for is when the user zooms in,
get rid of all of the position
fixed stuff because that is
kind of getting in the way--
unless that is what the user's
zooming in on, in which case
that will be annoying.
SURMA: I mean it
just now landed,
so I'm assuming
some best practice
and explorations are going
to start happening soon
around that.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
And I think it's one
of those extensible web
things where it's like
it's information we have.
We should be giving
developers it
and see what they
come up with it.
SURMA: And you can
use it if you need it.
If not, everything's just going
to behave the same, or better
now, I guess.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
I mean even to something
like analytics.
So you could, you
know, find out where
your users are pinch zooming.
You might find on one particular
page, everyone's pinch zooming
in.
So you can then go and
investigate and go, oh yeah,
these buttons aren't
great or something.
So yeah, that would be one way.
But yeah, that's
the visual viewport.
And this is something
that I think
that Apple pioneered is the idea
of adding multiple viewports.
SURMA: Apple pie-oneered?
[LAUGHING]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Surma.
SURMA: I had to do it.
I had to do it.